- I'm taking January off, and while I'm gone,
some amazing creators
are going to be taking over this channel.
We start with Rohin Francis,
a cardiologist who runs Medlife Crisis.
His video includes footage
from his diving trip to Borneo
and a couple of jokes that I
am deeply uncomfortable with.
Rohin, over to you.
- How long can you hold your breath?
One, two minutes?
I'm sorry, homo sapiens
are just pretty pathetic
next to the diving world champions
who can stay underwater
for one or two hours.
So how do they do it?
Well, there are a few different ways,
some you can actually take advantage of
by channelling your inner dolphin.
[dolphin squeak]
Others involve a little bit of gentle evolution,
so maybe a bit of a tall order
for most of us
unless you're a member of an Asian community
who have evolved into real life Aquamen.
[tranquil music]
There are five ways we can
spend longer underwater.
Number one is to increase your
tolerance to carbon dioxide.
The first thing that makes
you want to take a breath
is the rising level of carbon
dioxide or hypercapnia.
"Hyper from the Greek,
meaning too much or above,
"and kapnos, meaning smoke."
This acidic waste gas builds up,
and the body is so acutely sensitive to any changes in
pH,
even though it's tiny,
that it starts screaming at you to...
Breathe, god damn you!
Incidentally, this is why any diet claiming
to alkalinize your blood is basically
[cow moo]
Now you can improve your carbon dioxide
tolerance quite quickly.
I was able to go from about
90 seconds breath-hold
to five minutes with just a
few days' worth of snorkelling
and some tips from an
experienced free diver.
The next obstacle though is
a lot harder to get around
and that's hypoxia or low oxygen.
Hypoxia kills cells.
No matter how you die,
ultimately it's hypoxia
at the cellular level, i.e.
your cells being starved of oxygen,
that is the cause
of your inevitable death.
Unlike training your body to
become more tolerant to hypercapnia,
increasing your tolerance
to hypoxia takes years of training.
And of course, there is a level past
which no human can actually go.
So what is the solution for a longer dive?
Well, to maximise oxygen delivery
and minimise oxygen use.
Which brings me to number two.
The reason that this steak
is red is a protein called myoglobin,
which is found in the muscles
of pretty much every mammal
and it's responsible
for storing oxygen.
However if we were tucking
into a steak that came from
a seal it would be almost
black in appearance because
they've got ten times more
myoglobin than humans or cows.
This is not a human steak.
So why can't we just
pack in more myoglobin
and store more oxygen like the seals do?
The problem with proteins is that
[child burbles]
when they g--
The problem with proteins is th--
[child drums]
The problem with proteins
is when they get too tightly
packed they start to clump
together and lose their function
but marine mammals have evolved
a very clever way to deal with this.
Their variant of the myoglobin molecule
has a positive electric charge.
As I'm sure you know,
positive repels positive
and as a result the proteins
can get very close together
without forming those clumps.
Number three is to adjust your
blood flow to preferentially supply
the heart and the brain at the expense
of things like the extremities
which are much more tolerant
to having a reduced blood flow.
And number four is to
slow your heart down.
Your heart is very oxygen-hungry organ
so by reducing your heart
rate you're immediately
buying yourself more time under water.
I've mentioned these two together
because they form part of the dive reflex.
Erroneously sometimes called
the mammalian dive reflex.
It's actually been found in pretty much
every air-breathing vertebrate
that's been studied.
It's stimulated by submersion in water,
particularly cold water.
And remember, below 200m depth,
water is cold
no matter where you are
in the world
and of course that's where most
mammals do their hunting.
So what is the dive reflex?
Well let's take a look.
[bells]
[blows conch shell]
That's the wrong video.
I've not tried this before
but I filled up a basin with ice water.
I'm going to hold my
breath and submerge my face
in the water probably just
for about thirty seconds or so
and I'll see if anything
happens to my heart rate.
I've got a pulse oximeter
that you can see.
Okay. Here goes.
Agh. That was cold.
So my heart rate has dropped
right down to 45.
It's still staying at 45.
I don't know how long I was under
maybe 30, 40 seconds.
Now you can see it's slowly
starting to climb again.
This is just a cheap £10
oximeter that I bought online
so I don't know how low
the heart rate goes.
I don't know when it starts
becoming inaccurate but a lot of
these commercial devices will
have a cut off in the forties
because most people's heart
rate doesn't go that low.
But I think it was a
pretty clear demonstration.
In diving mammals this
is far more pronounced
with Weddell's seals, for example,
dropping the heart rate
as low as four beats a minute.
This effect is mediated by
my favourite nerve, the vagus.
Don't tell me you don't
have a favourite nerve.
Number five is also part
of the dive reflex because
it has another feature and
that's to squeeze your spleen.
The spleen is normally a small organ
which is involved with the immune system
and filtering the blood
as such stores
a little reservoir of blood.
Now, in a healthy human
with a normal sized spleen,
that volume will be around 160ml of blood
or 5% extra oxygen carrying ability,
which can be squeezed out
as part of the dive reflex when needed.
However, diving mammals can
have significantly enlarged spleens
representing a much
bigger reservoir of blood
to be provided when necessary.
I'm sorry, it looks like this one's out of
reach for most of us.
But that doesn't mean that
there aren't any members
of our species that
haven't taken advantage.
However, to meet them, we're
going to need to take a short trip
to Southeast Asia.
Years ago I saw a BBC documentary
that stuck in my mind permanently,
which was about a fisherman who was so
negatively buoyant
he essentially sank twenty metres and
walked along the bottom of the seabed,
and what's more, he almost effortlessly
held his breath for several minutes.
He was member of the Bajau community,
who are an ethnic group
indigenous to oceanic Southeast Asia,
the Philippines, Indonesia and here.
I'm in north Borneo at the moment,
in Sabah where they're one
of the biggest ethnic groups
and my diving instructors
here tell legendary stories of Bajau
who can hold their breath for fifteen
minutes at a time under water.
So what makes them so special?
The Bajau have led a nomadic
subsistence lifestyle
for at least a thousand years,
literally living out at sea,
eating what they catch and
rarely setting foot on land.
Earlier this year, a research
team led out of Copenhagen
published an incredible
study which demonstrated that
the Bajau have evolved
larger than average spleens
when compared to nearby
non-diving communities.
Free divers develop big
spleens through training.
But the enlarged spleens in
the Bajau are seen in members
of the community who don't
do any fishing or diving
so we know that this is
a genetic adaptation.
You might wonder how a
genetic pressure has been exerted
until you consider the fact
that the Bajau who dive
spend five hours under water per day.
So you can easily imagine
how any mutation to confer an
increased diving ability would
have been positively selected.
They identified many genetic
variations seen in the Bajau
but two snappily titled genes stood out.
PDE10A is a gene noted to have
differences amongst the Bajau,
specifically the part of
the gene that is responsible
for thyroid function and spleen size.
And the BDKRB2 gene is involved
in the blood redistribution part
of the dive reflex that
we talked about earlier.
Rather like the Sherpa in the
high altitude Himalaya, this is
evidence of human evolution
from our fairly recent past.
And now we're in the era of
genetic analysis becoming commonplace,
we're able to trace specific mutations
and how they've travelled
through time and geographically
to make us the people we are today.
But does research like this actually
benefit patients here in hospital?
Well I see the effects of
hypoxia secondary to disease
on a daily basis, where it
causes death and disability.
The hope is that by understanding
how the Bajau or the Sherpa
have adapted to life in a low
oxygen environment, might guide
development of new treatments
to help the critically ill.
Honey I've, uh, thought of a name.
Just hear me out here.
What do you think of Tom Scott Francis?
Ow!
- [clears throat] Thanks, Rohin.
Go subscribe to Medlife Crisis!
I would recommend starting
with his Minute Medicine video
on why you shouldn't run
every medical test even if you can.
Next week, a maths puzzle for you.